---
layout: post
title: SMB protocol 101
description: A brief introduction to smb prtocol. 
summary: A brief introduction to smb prtocol. 
tags: security networking
published: false
---
I discovered this protocol by doing a [HTB](https://hackthebox.eu)'s room which involved a Windows-based machine, and it was my very first time hacking that OS.


# Introduction

Also known as **Server Message Block**, is a client-server protocol, originally created by IBM than updated by Microsoft, that allow access to shared file, printers and ports over the network. <br>
We mostly see SMB services running on Windows machines. <br>
User side, SMB authentication requires a username and password to allow access to the server. It is controlled by the system administrator, who can add or block users and keep tabs on who is allowed in. <br>
Meanwhile at share-level, users have to enter a one-time password to access the shared file or server, but no username is required.



## Different Version

There are different variations of this protocol:

- SMBv1, released by IBM and modified by Microsoft, this version is also known because the ransomware [Wannacry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WannaCry_ransomware_attack) used a vulnerability of this version to spread itself over the network.

- SMBv2, performance boosted - debuted in Windows Vista

- SMBv3, security increased via end-to-end encryption - introduced in Windows 7

- SMBv3.02, possibility to completely disable SMBv1- came with Windows 8.1

- SMBv3.1.1, introduced AES-128 encryption, MITM protection and session verification - released in Windows 10

Always check your SMB's version and update it, if possible.

### How to use SMB

Fisrt of all we should know that it operate via TCP on port 445. If we are operating from a Linux machine, the command to see the shares is :

```bash
smbclient -L {HOSTNAME}
```
This will output something like this: 

```bash
Server time is Sat Aug 10 15:58:27 1996
Timezone is UTC+10.0
Password: 
Domain=[WORKGROUP] OS=[Windows NT 3.51] Server=[NT LAN Manager 3.51]

Server=[ZIMMERMAN] User=[] Workgroup=[WORKGROUP] Domain=[]

        Sharename      Type      Comment
        ---------      ----      -------
        ADMIN$         Disk      Remote Admin
        public         Disk      Public 
        C$             Disk      Default share
        IPC$           IPC       Remote IPC
        OReilly        Printer   OReilly
        print$         Disk      Printer Drivers


This machine has a browse list:

        Server               Comment
        ---------            -------
        HOPPER               Samba 1.9.15p8
        KERNIGAN             Samba 1.9.15p8
        LOVELACE             Samba 1.9.15p8
        RITCHIE              Samba 1.9.15p8
        ZIMMERMAN            

```

If you want to reach the public directory on the machine we have to type:

```bash
smbclient \\\\{HOSTNAME}\\public
```
It may ask you for a password. 

Once we are connected we can do a bunch of operation, type `smb: \> help` for more info.
